What is a trait? Take an individual
of any species and just look at it.
Any characteristic you can see or
measure in these individuals is called a trait.
For example, the weight,
height, or colour and so on.
All the traits we observe are called the
phenotype of that individual.
Derived from the Greek pheno,
meaning to show and type, meaning,
well, type.
You might have heard of
the concept nature versus nurture.
An individual's phenotype is
the result of a combination of their genes
inherited from parents known as
the genotype and the environment where they live.
In mathematical terms, we say that the phenotype value of
individual is a function
of the genetic value of that individual
and the environment where the individual lives.
Variation in environment includes factors such as
the amount of sunlight an individual receives,
the amount of nutrients consumed,
access to water, variation in weather, and so on.
Variation in the composition of
an individual's genetic material,
also known as genotype,
is determined by the genes inherited from the parents.
Individuals are made up
of billions and trillions of cells.
Inside each of these cells is a nucleus
with a complete copy of DNA molecules.
These DNA molecules are
the blueprint for how individuals are built.
But what is this DNA?
DNA is a long molecule that
looks like a twisted ladder, shown here.
The rungs of this ladder are
smaller molecules called nucleotides or bases.
If we unwind the DNA,
we can see four bases.
We have the adenine,
cytosine, guanine, and thymine.
Adenine pairs with thymine
and cytosine pairs with guanine.
A collection of
DNA molecules in a cell is called a genome.
For example, the human genome
consists of about 3 billion base pairs,
while the wheat genome consists of
about 17 billion base pairs.
These long DNA molecules are packaged into chromosomes.
In a diploid organism such as us and cattle.
Each cell carries two copies
of each of these chromosomes.
For example, cattle has 30 pairs of chromosomes,
while maize has 10.
There are also polyploid species that carry
more than two copies of each chromosome.
The sequence of bases in some parts of
DNA is translated into amino acids,
which are eventually assembled into
proteins for bodily functions such as growth.
Variation at or around these translated sites
drive genetic differences between individuals.
If you look at one base pair, for example,
this one, we can see
four possible combinations of the bases.
TA, GC, AT, and CG.
We call these four possible combinations as alleles.
In this course, we will focus on DNA sites
with just two alleles.
For example, this allele and this allele.
We will encode the alleles with a 0 and a 1,
where 0 means that this allele is ancestral allele
and 1 means that this is a derived allele,
that derived from the ancestral allele due to mutation.
In AlphaSimR, we will represent
DNA as a series of zeros and ones in one row tables,
like the short one here.
We call these tables haplotypes. A
diploid individual will have
two haplotypes for each chromosome.
The sum of the two haplotype alleles gives
the genotype in the form of allele dosage.
The values 0, 1,
or 2 mean that we have
no, one or two derived alleles at a site.
Please pause the video and
check if this is indeed the case.
Here is another example where you can pause
the video and fill in
the genotype allele dosages yourself.
How is this DNA variation related to
phenotype variation between individuals?
We will use Fisher's
quantitative genetics framework from 1918.
We will assume that the phenotype value of
individual is a sum of the genetic value of individual
and the environmental effect where the individual lives,
plus possibly the interaction
between the genotype and environment.
Following the same framework,
we will assume that the genetic value of
individual is our G is
the sum of the genetic values from
the different DNA positions in the genome,
assuming here that we have
k such DNA positions in the genome.
For our modelling purposes,
we will simulate all these quantities with
a computational technique
called random number generation.
We will use random number generators to simulate the DNA,
to select which DNA sites affect the trait,
to simulate genetic effects at these DNA sites
and finally, to simulate environmental effects,
possibly in interaction with the genotype.
For example, let's assume that the trait has a mean
of 10 and is affected by four DNA sites.
In these sites, substitution of
ancestral to derived alleles increases
genetic value for 1 unit at
the first position plus 2, at the second position,
minus 1 at third position plus 1 at the fourth position.
Now let us generate genome of one individual,
just one chromosome pair with
four variable sites that all affect our trait.
To apply the substitution effects to sites,
we will multiply them with
haplotype and genotype allele dosages.
You might want to pause the video and do this yourself.
With our two haplotypes and the genotype,
we get the following site-specific values:
0, plus 2, minus 1, 0, 1, plus 2,
minus 1, 1, 1, 4,
minus 2, and plus 1.
When we sum these values across the sites,
we get the following two values
for the haplotype, the total values,
that is a 1 for the first haplotype,
a 3 for the second haplotype.
And then the genotype is the sum of
the two haplotypes will have the value 4.
If you now go back to our equation that the
phenotype value of individual is,
the value of the genotype plus the environmental
effect and potentially interaction
between the genotype and environment,
for this individual,
we now have the mean plus the genetic value.
And assuming, let's say that the
individual experiences a positive environment
that increases the value for 2 units and there
is no genotype by environment interaction,
the phenotype value of that individual will be 16 units.
Please pause the video and calculate
genetic and phenotype values for the second individual.
If it experiences an environmental effect
of minus 1 unit.
There you go.
This video gave you
an understanding of the relationship between
traits and DNA and how we manage these concepts in AlphaSimR.
Equipped with these concepts,
you will be able to start
simulating DNA and traits in AlphaSimR.
These knowledge and skills will set
you up for exploring various topics
in modelling breeding programmes.