Now let's move from genetic values to phenotype values.
And this is really important because in
real life we never observe genetic values.
This, what we're doing here is
a simulation, we can simulate genetic values.
And we can inspect genetic values.
We can work with genetic values.
But when we're doing next set simulation steps,
we should usually never work
with the genetic values we should work with
the phenotype values because
that's what is happening in the reality.
As discussed elsewhere,
phenotypes of complex traits are
affected by both genes and the environment.
To simulate such phenotype values
in AlphaSimR,  we will have to simulate
environmental effects in addition to
the QTL effects that we have simulated above.
In AlphaSimR, we can simulate phenotype values for
individuals in a population
with this set Pheno function.
When we call this function,
we either have to specify
variance of environmental effects.
And we can do that through the varE argument.
Or equivalently, we can specify
the heritability through the h2 argument.
Heritability is a very important parameter.
And that parameter is essentially a ratio between
genetic variance and phenotype variance.
What I'm going to denote here,
phenotype variants with v underscore P subscript p.
And that phenotype variance is in
effect a function of
genetic variance and environmental variance.
So therefore, we can calculate heritability simply as
taking genetic variance and
dividing it by the phenotype variance,
which in, which in fact is
the sum of the genetic variance and environment,
environment variance.
I would like to emphasise that this formula holds under
the assumption there are
no interaction between genotype and environment,
and there are no other sources of phenotype variation.
But that's suffices for now for our simulations.
So let us now simulate phenotypes for our population.
And we're going to assume
that genetic and environmental variance
are equal in size.
So I'm going to be setting VG and VE
to 450 kilogrammes squared.
That means that the phenotype variants will
be 900 kilogrammes squared.
And if I then calculate the heritability,
we will see that the heritability is 1/2 or
0.5. To achieve that.
I'm now going to run these two lines of code where I'm
using the set pheno function on
the base pop population object.
I'm going to specify heritability of 0.5.
And I'm going to save the output
into the same object called base pop,
which means I'm going to take a base population.
I'm going to add phenotypes to it.
And then I'm going to overwrite
this object. Now, as we did before with the genetic values
we can now also inspect the phenotype values.
And we can get the phenotype values
by looking directly at the element of this object.
Or we can use the pheno function.
So if I show you first for the first option,
we're getting these
first ten phenotype values for the first ten individuals.
And I can use the pheno function that gives me
exactly the same output. As before,
I can now start combining the AlphaSimR
and R functionality.
Here I'm showing you the histogram
of the phenotype values.
And here I'm showing you
the variance of the phenotype values,
which is the phenotypic variance.
I would like to emphasise that even though we've
assumed that phenotype variance is 900,
because this is a stochastic simulation,
sometimes the resulting variances will vary.
We can go one step further and we can start plotting
one set of values against each other.
So for example, we know that
phenotype values are a function of genetic values.
So we should see some positive correlation
between these two sets of values.
So what I'm going to use
an R function plot so that on the x-axis
I'm going to plot genetic values
from our base population and on the y-axis.
And I'm gonna, I'm gonna plot phenotype values.
And I'm going to add some nice axes labels.
Now to show you this plot,
we see here, just a little bit more. So I
have phenotype values on
the y-axis and genetic values on the x-axis.
And as you can see, this cloud of points showing that
as I increase genetic value and on average,
phenotype values also increase, increase.
Which makes sense because
phenotype value or a function of genetic value.
Just to quantify that a little bit,
I can then use our function core,
which is going to calculate correlation between
genetic values and the phenotype values.
And as we see, we have a positive correlation of about
0.7 between the variation
in genetic values and the phenotype values.
Which means that as phenotypes values,
as genetic values, increased,
phenotype values also increase.
It's important to emphasise that phenotype values are
a function of the genetic value
and genetic value of individually is fixed.
But they also function of the environmental effects
which are not fixed for individual,
they can vary over time or space.
So if we repeat the call of
set pheno on a particular population,
we will get different values.
So if now, if I now again run the set pheno function on
the base pop with the same heritability
and extract phenotypes.
But just for first five individuals.
If I do it once and if I do it twice,
you will notice that the phenotypes differ because
possibly the same individual number
one experienced different environment.
So now we've seen how to simulate
both genetic values and
phenotype values for a particular trait in
AlphaSimR. A lot of work in AlphaSimR
also involves quantitative genetics
and AlphaSimR provides basic functionality for
these types of analyses from our simulated populations.
For example, we can calculate various,
various means and variance of
the simulated values as well as
other more advanced statistics.
Now I'm going to show you how
these AlphaSimR functions
compared to the R functions.
So as we've seen before,
we can calculate the variance of genetic values,
which is the genetic variance
for our trait. We can do the same
for the phenotype variance.
And then if I do a ratio of the two,
then I am effectively am calculating the heritability,
which in our case,
the realised heritability is 0.65
if I round it up. Now in AlphaSimR,
we also have some functions that we
can use to the same effect.
There is a function of var G that gives us genetic variance,
var P that gives us phenotype variance.
So if I repeat the var G, var P,
and then their ratio, we're
getting practically the same result.
In fact, it's not exactly the same.
And the difference between just running
the base R functions like var g,
v of the base pop,
or var g of base pop.
There is a slight difference in the sense
that base R is using,
is using n minus one as
a denominator to calculate sample variance.
While AlphaSimR, var G,
or Var P functions use n as
a denominator to calculate population variance.
In most cases, the difference is not gonna be,
it's not gonna be large.
So you don't need to really worry about that.
Here I have a note where
I would just like to emphasise again,
and we've seen this already,
that even though we have provided a heritability of
0.5 to our simulation
when we are calling set pheno call,
we will quite likely see some variation from
the actual heritability of
the simulated phenotypes as you have seen,
as you have seen above.
And this is so because AlphaSimR
simulations are stochastic.
And what we will tend to see is a difference between the
specified and the actual heritability will be very small,
if anything, in large populations.
However, if you are going to be simulating
smaller population than the difference
between the input and
the output can potentially be quite substantial.
You can study more about AlphaSimR
functions for quantitative genetics
by reading help pages, for example,
for the mean P, as
well as the mean G and the var P and the var G functions.
Finally, I would like to point out
additional resources on
traits and quantitative genetics in AlphaSimR.
There is much more in AlphaSimR in terms of,
in terms of these two aspects.
And I really, really
encourage you to look at the vignette.
You can access this vignette about the traits
by running this piece of code.
The title of the vignette
is 'Traits in AlphaSimR'
and has been written by the author
of the AlphaSimR package, Chris Gaynor.
And in this vignette, Chris talks about, quite a lot about
various types of genetic effects that we can simulate.
For example, such as dominant epistasis
and genotype by environment interaction.
I would like to point to that there
is quite a number of functions that
deal with these additional effects.
For example, we have a gv function to extract
genetic value or bv for breeding values,
dominance deviation, epistatic effects, etc.
This concludes this screencast on simulating traits.
I hope you enjoyed it and see you in the next one.